---
title: "Clamping and Cutting the Landscape: Latour and Burroughs on Delocalized Meaning"
pubDate: 2026-01-27
author: Soren Allen 
---

Bruno Latour’s Reassembling the Social seeks to flatten, to “clamp” the map of the global and local landscape so that the planes are placed beside each other (174). Instead of assuming an overarching system, Latour prioritizes the process of producing a network. Since everything is produced somewhere, with a variety of conditional influences, Latour demands an acknowledgment of these production sites. The “fragile chain references” that can be traced work to reshape the immediacy of experience, with ceaseless, embedded processes being performed locally and globally, between the micro and macro scales (176). Latour demands a reshuffling of the structural assumptions that we impose on production, one that reemphasizes the local conditions of production that inform the wider connections we make. Thus, the macro no longer describes a wider or a larger site in which the micro would be embedded, but is rather “another equally local, equally micro place, which is connected to many others through some medium transporting specific types of traces” (176). 

Like misplacing the comma in “let’s eat grandma”, Latour poses a surveillance system over organization that demands tracing relative context on minute components of the whole. Latour references the ideal prison of the Panopticon as a metaphor for total surveillance that feeds the Janus face of “total paranoia and total megalomania” (181). Sociologists who dream of occupying the center of the prison are seeking an impossible, totalizing gaze. Latour proposes the Oligopticon that studies the narrow sites that actually manufacture global structures, performing the opposite of the Panopticon’s absolutism. Latour suggests the oligopticon that, opposed to the utopic panopticon that wholly surveys the ideal prison, sees smaller aspects of the network that are still notably integral — “sturdy but extremely narrow views of the (connected) whole are made possible — as long as the connections hold” (181). Oligoptica, seeing too little to feed the megalomania of the inspector, instead maintains acute awareness of a fragment, making possible a precisely focused view of the connected whole. This ability to structure anything is entirely dependent on continuous connections, as they must be linked to the sites they control through a ceaseless transportation of information. If you cut a structure-making site from its connections, it stops being able to structure anything.

Overarching systems impose a structure of organizations that are “certainly not ‘bigger’ than those it organizes” (179). Swarming actors are just as pertinent to the network as the whole that we perceive as final. Actors maintain autonomy “because an organization is even less a society than the body politic that it’s made only of movements, which are woven by the constant circulation of documents, stories, accounts, goods, and passions” (179). There remains a movement to their connections, demanding continuous tracing of the perpetual relations. In that, language is not only articulately physically constructed, but perpetually reshuffled in with letters’ connection, every word’s placement. Words, amalgams of letters, are as actors that reveal the “narrow space in which all of the grandiose ingredients of the world begin to be hatched” (179). Words are networks in themselves, assemblages of an array of letters that form internal languages of their own that shift in their application — their placement. Words describe, imparting meanings that have already been sensed but not formally articulated. They are inherently local, intended to apply to a certain set of circumstances, a definition, but their application is unbounded. This invites the inception of infinite organizations, inviting you, the narrator, to question their order, their compilation, while maintaining a fixed essence of the pieces. Deterritorialized from their singular form, a sentence structure opens up new possibilities, new arrangements.  

Words are not mere intermediaries of language, but the mediators through which language is understood, with each cluster of letters mutating the essence they carry. We become the intermediaries through which this meaning is transferred, with the agency to reshuffle linguistic interactions. These networks “may explain through which vehicles, which traces, which trails, which types of information, the world is being brought inside those places and then, after having been transformed there, are being pumped back out of its narrow walls” (179). This network does not merely provide context by stringing words together, granting them proximate spatial dependence, but is a connective mechanism. One could not glean the purposes of a statement without divergent words, pauses, and breaths. But with the combined force of multiple known words, a grander connection can be made. Further yet, it can be remade, reorganized, or cut up.   

While Latour shows that the social is an effect of traceable linkages rather than a preexisting structure, William Burroughs performs this principle materially on language with his cut-up technique. Burroughs’ cut-up technique literally cuts up fragments from written passages or recordings and reorganizes them at random, deriving new meaning from previously fixed organizations. Splicing and reorganizing, Burroughs founded a necessarily experimental medium that emphasizes the profound power of language as a mechanism of meaning production and control. The random juxtapositions produced by cut-ups mimic the latent potentialities of unexpected configurations and relations within the social landscape. Cut-ups delocalize language by shifting their prescribed position into other places, allowing new manifestations of the meaning of words. Burroughs manifests physical artifacts that recognize the elusivity of imparted meaning and the traces of essential interaction, transforming the prior application of words into entirely new entities. The random displacement of language reveals that meaning is not inherent or guaranteed, but mobile and contingent. This technique ruptures categorical conventions of perception and thought that we bind our understanding of the natural and social to. Each fragment is haunted by its previous context in its production of a new form that both remembers and forgets its origin, revealing that language is not just a medium, but a constantly shifting force. Cut-ups reveal that society is not a fixed structure but a dynamic collage, always capable of being cut apart and reshuffled. Cut-ups flatten the landscape of language, providing equal potential for each fragment to be integrated into a network in flux — one of delocal relativity. 
