---
title: "Giving Life to the Depths: Disrupting Binaries and Pushing the Bounds of Subjectivity in Nnedi Okorafor’s Lagoon"
description: An alternate account of the Atlantic 
pubDate: 2026-01-27
author: Landon James
---

In 1997 Detroit electronic duo Drexciya released a CD called The Quest in which they propose an alternative outcome of the Middle Passage. Drexciya go on to ask in the liner notes to their CD:

Could it be possible for humans to breathe underwater? A fetus in its mother's womb is certainly alive in an aquatic environment. During the greatest holocaust the world has ever known, pregnant America-bound African slaves were thrown overboard by the thousands during labor for being sick and disruptive cargo. Is it possible that they could have given birth at sea to babies that never needed air? (Drexciya)[1]

In this ‘alternate history’ enslaved Africans populate the depths of the Atlantic, producing “self-destroying narratives, fictions that strain against the conventional pull of identification and closure” (Mayer 563). This retelling of the Middle Passage reveals that both America and Africa are alien lands. Black people henceforth become the mutated descendants of these nearly-drowned slaves, themselves more alien than human. To understand these posthuman fictions, Kodwo Eshun taps into the waterworlds of Drexciya’s mythology to develop a new aesthetic of estrangement, or alienation, for Afrofuturism. Our underwater worlds, a place long devoid of humanity, become a site for possibility where African subjectivity is tied inexplicably to the cool waves of the Atlantic.

Nnedi Okorafor likewise challenges the separation between the water and humanity, humanity and the natural, and humanity and other life, excavating the tension thereof. The binaries that have long populated the Western imaginary—White-Black, Male-Female, Human-Alien—are turned inside out and rendered murky in Okorafor’s novel Lagoon. In this text, Okorafor denies the ocean’s status as a blank slate. Instead, it is clear that the ocean is not merely a canvas for our imagination but a crucial participant in our imagining. Integrating our environment into our subjectivity is crucial for decentering Western-humanist notions of subjectivity that have dominated science fiction (SF). Thus, Okorafor utilizes an aesthetic of estrangement in order to help Africans escape the intellectual grasp of neocolonialism. By diving beneath the waves of Bar Beach into a familiarly alien environment, I argue that Lagoon disrupts traditional first contact narratives by introducing new problems, expectations, and most of all, outcomes. In doing so, Lagoon shatters binary human-alien distinctions and calls for new posthuman subjectivity for the African continent.[i]

Western myth systems have for a long time privileged the human above the nonhuman. These categories, for as long as they’ve existed, have been used to justify the exploitation of both the environment and non-Western people. For instance, the categorization of African slaves as property removed their treatment from moral consideration and denied African slaves the status of ‘human’. Nature, too, has been relegated to the category of nonhuman in the Western imagination, paving the way for the systematic rape of the natural world and its creatures. The sea has become a site of overfishing, industrial pollution, the dumping of bodies, and the accumulation of trash islands to the tune of some countries' total land area. The sea has been conceived as a place outside of history and identity in which human life is precluded except in the ways humans can use the sea.[ii] Counter to these narratives is a conception of subjectivity so-called the posthuman. To be posthuman is to reject these precepts, leaning into an embrace of alienation. That is to say, the posthuman denies the human as such; the posthuman is defined by fissures and breaks in their subjectivity, a refusal to be essentialized or unified by the soul, and a new understanding of the ways our body informs all that we are.[iii] The posthuman emphasizes the ways in which our subjectivity is socially constructed, responding to our new set of material circumstances and seeking an integration between our alienated consciousness and our environment(s).[iv] It is crucial for the posthuman to imagine themselves as part of their environments: were the ocean to die, so too would a piece of the posthuman.        

Thus, when Okorafor places the sea and its inhabitants at the very center of her story, she is reclaiming the sea and its contents from Western narratives. Okorafor is demarcating a new subjectivity, not limited to humanity but to all life. This changes what deserves attention in the text and consequently what it means to be human. Indeed, Lagoon opens under the sea. A swordfish swims along, it is conscious and startlingly ‘human’ (Okorafor 10). This swordfish and its sea brethren are the first to be contacted by aliens (14). Okorafor makes clear that there is no reason why aliens would not first contact life under the sea. Why would humanity be the ‘natural’ choice here? Why would aliens assume that the only life on Earth is humanity? Yet, this moment is reason to pause; it sets the table for the entire story.

From the very start of the novel, we are denied the closure that neat human-nonhuman binaries provide. Instead, we are asked to treat every form of life in the book as having equal claim to subjectivity, and to the wonderful advances these new-aliens promise. There is no ‘natural’ choice among any lifeform as such; the alien would contact the first life it sees. The aliens reach out to the sea creatures: “When a golden blob ascends to meet her [the swordfish], she doesn’t move to meet it. But she doesn’t flee either…When it communicates with her, asking question after question, she hesitates. It doesn’t take long for her apprehension to shift to delight. What good questions it asks. She tells it exactly what she wants” (Okorafor 14). Under the water, these desires materialize: our swordfish is transformed from an ordinary swordfish into a monstrous sea creature, an apex predator fit for an alien planet. Cultural critic Ruth Mayer gives us the tools to understand Okorafor’s narrative choice: “The aliens and monsters haunting Afrofuturist narratives explode the confines of historiography and realism, collapsing established patterns of signification and identification, and put forth undecipherable codes and fractured images” (Mayer 564). This fracturing of images, and production of enigmas, is a theme throughout Lagoon. A metatextual glance at Okorafor’s text reveals the same refusal of established images and lines of flight. The novel breaks and starts, sputters, switches perceptive from human to animal, from animal to myth, and from myth to something utterly new.[v]

The swordfish is not alone—the sea itself is changed into something alien, it is given its own desires. The aliens’ arrival has cleansed the water of human pollutants, such that “Despite the FPSO Mystras’s loading hose leaking crude oil, the ocean water just outside Lagos, Nigeria, is now so clean that a cup of its salty-sweet goodness will heal the worst human illnesses and cause a hundred more illnesses not yet known to humankind” (Okorafor 14). In such a way, the cleansing of the water can be read as a concretization of the Atlantic’s desire to be clean, much as the swordfish was to become a monster. A new mythology of the Atlantic is proposed. Far from the lifeless waves and desolate seascapes of the Western imaginary, the sea is now full of life. The Atlantic is defined in this way outside of ‘humanity’ as an entity unto itself; the human qua ‘human’ is, in fact, decentered from this narrative of the ocean, replaced in usage by the alien. It becomes the Black Atlantic. In this way, Lagoon sets the groundwork to continuously make the sea a character in the story, not merely a setting but a participant in the narrative. The ocean, as it is rendered an alien environment, becomes an extension of the wider technological environment where an intermediation between living creatures and the ocean itself can occur.[vi]

As the story shifts gears, we are introduced to our homo sapien protagonists Adaora, Agu, and Anthony. Each of these three characters, much the same as the swordfish and the Atlantic, are sites of possibility, becoming, and change. On Bar Beach, seemingly by coincidence, these three disparate characters—a marine biologist, a soldier, and a rapper—are the first ‘humans’ to be contacted (Okorafor 20-21). Swept away and abducted by the sea, they meet the alien Ayodele. Ayodele becomes the impetus for change—exposing the latent desires of humanity and the potentials within each character in the story.

In this abduction scene, Okorafor introduces a new sort of Black Atlanteen mythology where, in all instances, we are asked to confront the prevailing histories of our moment. The abduction scene in itself rewrites the history of the Middle Passage, a space and time where slaves were stolen, abducted, from the African continent and shipped across the Atlantic, marking the Atlantic as a place of loss and death.[vii] In Okorafor’s mythology, Ayodele reveals all that this new ‘Black Atlantic’[viii] has to offer. As the narrative progresses, these characters become increasingly complex assemblages, responding to the alienification of their environments and the wisdom Ayodele’s world has to offer.

Inhuman powers within them become heightened, accelerating as they enter the ocean. Agu has inhuman strength, Anthony the power to produce sonic booms, and Adaora has the power of a fish—breathing underwater and possessing a new ‘mermaid’ body (298). Well into the text as the three are suspended underwater by alien powers, they find themselves asking, “What are we?” (Okorafor 305). The answer is clear: “We’re people,” (305) yet they do not call themselves ‘human.’ The alien-inhumanity of these characters becomes the very source of their unique subjectivity.

In his 1992 Essay “Loving the Alien,” Mark Sinker elucidates this alien claim to subjectivity: “The ships landed long ago: they already laid waste whole societies, abducted and genetically altered swathes of citizenry, imposed without surcease their values. Africa and America—and so by extension Europe and Asia—are already in their various ways Alien Nations. No return to normal is possible: what "normal" is there to return to?” (Sinker). Sinker recontextualizes the Middle Passage as a first alien abduction, making clear that appeals to humanity are far outdated. Instead, we are already aliens; we are the products of an invasion buried deep in the past. Personhood can not merely belong to humanity because there is no longer such a cultural concept. Instead, the category of person or people is to be extended to forms of subjectivity beyond the fingers, toes, appendages, and prosthesis of human beings. Our three homo-sapien protagonists become as the story progresses increasingly alien and increasingly okay with that, typifying this posthuman embrace of alienation.

Dredging up, from the depths of the Atlantic, this alien past and future we can see how Ayodele is herself a model of this radical subjectivity in the text: inhuman, malleable, and responsive to her environment. She is a shapeshifter in actual fact. Her appearance as human in the early parts of the text has nothing to do with her humanity; rather, it is a matter of convenience to look like a human while around humans so as to not scare them away. Nearing the climax of the story Ayodele finds herself meeting with the President of Nigeria, offering to restore his deteriorating heart. When the President of Nigeria asks Ayodele, “Are you truly a stranger? An extraterrestrial? An alien?” (Okorafor 261). Ayodele responds, “Yes” (261). The President continues: “You look like a woman from Igboland” (261). Of course, “Looks can be deceiving,” Ayodele replies (261). Looks can, indeed, be deceiving; as people, we are always more than we appear. This sort of obvious commentary is spelled out humorously and obviously by Ayodele, who at will can shift her form to anything she desires from an ordinary woman to even Karl Marx (261). That Ayodele is recognizable as a ‘woman from Igboland’ does not reduce her subjectivity to the particularities or significations of her body fixed in time. That we look like humans does not actually mean we are ‘humans’. If we are to continue to take Ayodele as a model of subjectivity seriously, the question soon becomes: how can we become like Ayodele?

The answer is that we already are. Kodwo Eshun makes this even more clear: “Slaves are aliens… ‘Not only physical and environmental aliens, but products of a completely alien philosophical system.’ Inhumans, posthumans owing nothing to the human species. Hence the endless arguments in the 18th C about the ability of slaves to read or write, the equivalent to 20th C arguments concerning the potential existence of artificial intelligence” (More Brilliant 113). Ayodele stands in for this alien slave, emerging literally from the depths of the sea to transform humanity. She is the product of an alien system, one which owes nothing to the innovations of Western metaphysics, ontology, epistemology, etc. We see here how Okorafor layers metaphors within this text, crafting indecipherable images and convoluted belief systems.

Still, we cannot help reading Ayodele’s final scene—where her death provokes a mutant fog that rolls across the whole of Nigeria—and ask: what is Ayodele (Okorafor 317)? Ayodele, nor any of the aliens, are explained in the text. We know nothing about their technologies, the ways in which they communicate with each other, or what they do when we’re not around.[ix] The answer to this question remains the same. In this reading, Ayodele is a Drexciyan: she epitomizes what Kodwo Eshun calls an aesthetics of estrangement. In other words, Ayodele is a practitioner of chaos and multiplicity. Ayodele being indecipherable and confusing is key to her subversion of Western myth systems which seek out and create binary distinctions.[x] By shifting constantly in form and evading human intervention to control her she annihilates any hope of generating an alien-human binary. Ayodele eludes all attempts to be defined in opposition to ‘humans’, even the sneakiest attempts fall well short by the ending.

To again use Kodwo Eshun’s language, Okorafor is an ‘esoterrorist.’ “‘Mommy, what's an esoterrorist?’ Something, or someone who terrorises through esoteric myth Systems” (Eshun “Fear Of A Wet Planet”). Okorafor crafts systems of mythology that disrupt and entangle attempts to interrogate her story using notions like ‘human.’ Mayer, likewise, places this terroristic use of an aesthetic of alienation as a force “not to be understood as neat inversions of the dominant value system, but as more extensive tactics of confusion” (Mayer 564). The goal of an esoterrorist is to break down binary oppositions; Okorafor’s myth systems prevent us from placing Ayodele against Adaora, nor Ayodele against the President. We are meant to understand the ways in which our subjectivity is irreducible to human or nonhuman. Rather, we see in Lagoon the ways we already resemble more a complex assemblage shifting in form and function. Ayodele’s posthuman subjectivity is not merely a SF fantasy but a way for us to conceive of ourselves. That is, we are not static entities and we do not have an essence that we are bound to. The politics of our identities is more complex than humanism can allow; the human makes us forget the myriad of ways we can be.

Under this reading, Lagoon becomes a SF narrative concerned less with the reinscription or erasure of dominant ideology than with the proposal of a radical form of subjectivity. SF “is a means through which to preprogram the present” (Eshun “Further Considerations” 290). The production of SF narratives about the future is a matter of manufacturing, engineering, and refining feedback loops between “its preferred future and its becoming present” (290). In Lagoon, Okorafor is seeking to similarly preprogram the present such that the humanity of the African continent cannot be in question.[xi] Okorafor pushes us beyond humanity toward this alien future; her text is as much SF as prophecy.

To conclude we must return to the Drexciya: “By inventing another outcome for the Middle Passage, this sonic fiction opens a bifurcation in time which alters the present by feeding back through its audience ­you, the landlocked mutant descendent of the Slave Trade” (Eshun “Fear of a Wet Planet”). The same can be said of what Okorafor is doing in Lagoon. In this text, the first contact narrative becomes less about what would happen if aliens landed on Earth and more about what already happened when slavers landed on Bar Beach in the 16th century.Okorafor places us in a rift in time caught somewhere between the Middle Passage and a posthuman future. Lagoon finds that what is required to break free from the chains of this neocolonial fracture in time is the dislocation of the human, embracing the alienation that technology and mythology can provide.

Bibliography

Drexciya. The Quest, Compact disk Liner Notes, Submerge SVE-8, 1997,  https://www.discogs.com/release/12117-Drexciya-The-Quest?srsltid=AfmBOop65OiWLLbwrqph8emOh7eIYdUA_gKtqA7UdGiXBU_Wjz-1QE3G

Eshun, Kodwo. “Drexciya: Fear Of A Wet Planet.” The Wire, n167 ed., Jan. 1998, https://web.archive.org/web/20120311014922/https://www.thewire.co.uk/articles/123/.

---. “Further Considerations of Afrofuturism.” CR: The New Centennial Review, vol. 3, no. 2, June 2003, pp. 287–302. DOI.org (Crossref), https://doi.org/10.1353/ncr.2003.0021.

---. More Brilliant than the Sun: Adventures in Sonic Fiction. Quartet Books, 1998.

Gilroy, Paul. The Black Atlantic: Modernity and Double Consciousness. 8. print, Harvard Univ. Press, 2003.

Hayles, N. Katherine. How We Became Posthuman: Virtual Bodies in Cybernetics, Literature, and Informatics. University of Chicago Press, 1999.

Mayer, Ruth. “‘Africa As an Alien Future’: The Middle Passage, Afrofuturism, and Postcolonial Waterworlds.” Amerikastudien / American Studies, vol. 45, no. 4, 2000, pp. 555–66. JSTOR.

Okorafor, Nnedi. Lagoon. First Saga Press hardcover edition, Saga Press, 2015.

Sinker, Mark. “Loving The Alien.” The Wire, ISSUE 96, Feb. 1992, https://web.archive.org/web/20060209100352/http://www.thewire.co.uk/archive/essays/black_science_fiction.html.

[i] Elsewhere, Judith Rahn has written about posthumanism and race in Lagoon. My account differs in the way that it emphasizes the Atlantic both as an extension of our technological environment (particularly as it is rendered alien in the text) and a major feature of Lagoon.

[ii] For an exploration of western notions of the sea in literature, see Mayer’s excellent analysis of ‘Benito Cereno’ (Mayer 559-560).

[iii] To clarify, posthumanism does not seek to claim that the category of human, dominated by Cartesian dualism and Enlightenment rationality, is ‘dead’. Instead, the posthuman represents a shift in the way we as homo-sapiens understand our subjectivity in relation to late-20th and early 21st C material conditions, much as humanism responded to the material conditions of the 16-19th C. No account of ‘humanist’ subjectivity from the 16-19th C would put it in these terms; this account is seeking not to ‘read’ Descartes, Locke, Hobbes, Rousseau etc. but rather provide an account of the ways in which ‘the fictions of humanity’ construct us. We should resist the humanist instinct to draw a binary between humans and posthumans.  

[iv] For a more in-depth discussion of what posthuman means and or demarcates see N. Katherine Hayles book: How we Became Posthuman, particularly chapter 1 “Towards Embodied Virtuality”.  

[v] Chapters in Okorafor’s novel are written from the perspective of swordfish, bats, and even African deities. The narrative proceeds in a non-linear fashion, both spatially and temporally. We see the subjectivity of the characters in the story develop as the story progresses. It is unclear by the end if the characters really are the same type of people they were at the beginning. 

[vi] In various other texts, N. Katherine Hayles understands our technological environment in terms of a ‘computational universe,’ this avenue would also yield an interesting analysis for Lagoon

[vii] Okorafor rewrites in Lagoon a new signifigation of the Atlantic: shifting from a site of closure, of slavery, to a site of possibility, unique subjectivities, and the possibilities of life outside of Western histories. This represents a reversal of roles. Whereas white European ‘humans’ contacted and enslaved Africans during the period of the Middle passage In Lagoon, ‘humanity’ is the subject of a new African subjectivities’ scrutiny. It is an inversion of the medical examinations and experimentations conducted by white doctors and slave owners on African slaves. In Okorafor’s text it is revealed that the cruelties inflicted upon African slaves by Europeans were entirely avoidable.

[viii] The notion of the Black Atlantic is developed in Paul Gilroy’s The Black Atlantic: Modernity and Double Consciousness. Kodwo Eshun borrows, and reads, Gilroy as a SF author in order to introduce notions of a ‘Black Atlanteens’ in his texts.

[ix] In fact, Ayodele refuses to answer questions regarding her existence (Okorafor 49-50).

[x] Ayodele continuously escapes the linguistic and metaphysical traps set by modern day Deleuzian control societies, (‘embodied’ by the role of the military in Okorafor’s text). She is beyond the reach of Western myth systems that have striated the Atlantic for 500 years with shipping lanes and flows of currency and those whose logistical expertise enabled millions of Africans to be shipped across the sea. Mayer makes a similar point regarding the Drexciyans (563).

[xi] Although not discussed in this paper, this point hints at Okorafor’s inspiration for writing Lagoon i.e. the r
