
title: (La)tour of the Islamic State: Group Formation and Apocalypse
description: Oh?
pubDate: 2026-01-27
author: Landon James
---

Groups are never static; they are constantly engaged in practices of formation. This is the insight Bruno Latour provides us in “The First Source of Uncertainty.” Latour paints a careful and intentionally general picture of how we can trace groups formation. Latour generates for us a list “of the elements always present in controversies about groups” (Latour 29). These elements, which each require further explication, spurred a thought: what of groups that seek their own annihilation? These include groups like Heaven’s Gate, Jim Jones’ Peoples Temple, death-cults of any variety, and for the purposes of this essay, ISIS. What do we make of groups whose practices, systems of belief, actions, all push towards annihilation? What are the traces left behind by groups who attempt to bring about the apocalypse (on a micro or macro scale) and what does that tell us? Following the traces left by ISIS, we can perhaps begin to reveal something new about how they function. 

To begin, we should return to the list of controversies and trace them. First, to delineate a group, a group must have spokespeople (Latour 31). Second, “whenever some work has to be done to trace…the boundary of a group, other groupings are designated as being empty, archaic, dangerous, obsolete, and so on” (32). Third, “when groups are formed…their spokesperson looks…frantically for ways to define them” (33). Lastly, “among the many spokespersons that make possible the durable definition of groups, one must include social scientists, social sciences, social statistics, and social journalism” (33). Casting our eyes back towards ISIS, it appears that we have a paradigmatic example for Latour’s a-socialogical method.

ISIS has had clear spokespeople at various points in its existence. There have been caliphs, the first of which was Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, who meaningfully claimed their separation from other jihadist groups (Wood). And like a hydra, for every head that had been cut off two more grew back, splintering and shattering, much like plastic dissolving into microplastics. After his death, a new face replaced him (Wikipedia). There have also been appointed spokespeople like Sheikh Abu Muhammad al-Adnani, whose own rhetoric in 2015 mixed ancient calls for crop-dessimation with threats of vehicular manslaughter (Wood). 

At every moment, ISIS has generated anti-groups: shadows, flat and easy to project meanings and associations onto. These anti-groups have been construed widely as ‘infidels’ that are positioned as the enemy of ISIS, a category that had grown wider and wider the more ISIS waned (Wood). These anti-groups have also included other militant groups, especially those with different theological interpretations. By painting the world outside the group as more corrupted, more fallen, and more doomed than they are, ISIS increases its own internal coherence. ISIS’s nihilism becomes exaggerated boundary-work, tightly policing the entry and exit of the group. It is this apocalyptic nihilism which provides a compelling alternative to the discontentment of its embers with the world.    

ISIS was, especially early on, misunderstood in the West by the Academy, journalists, and States themselves. The brutality, religiosity, and seriousness that came to define ISIS separately from groups like al-Qaeda was not captured by the early analysis of the group (Wood). There was a tendency, especially after the post-9/11 fervor wore off in the mid 2010’s, to reject any question of inherent violence in Islam. But, “it’s this ‘Islam is a religion of peace’ mantra. As if there is such a thing as ‘Islam’! ‘It’s what Muslims do, and how they interpret their texts.’ Those texts are shared by all Sunni Muslims, not just the Islamic State” (Wood). ISIS has as much legitimacy as anyone else to interpret the Quran. There is of course nothing deterministic about the beliefs and practices of Muslims, but the borders by which the Islamic State and Islam itself were brought into question. 

Returning back to Latour, “if you stop making and remaking groups, you stop having groups” (Latour 35). It is the performance of ‘grouping’ that defines each and every group. ISIS defined its apocalyptic nihilism as essential to the group's system of belief. ISIS defined itself by its decay, its stories of creation and destruction, its performance. A-sociologists are able to account for these features (35). The theatrics of ISIS are what explains its cohesion, trajectory, and appeal despite the fact its telos require its end. In other words, ISIS cannot simply gesture to their own self-immolation; they must perform it, describe it, rehearse it, justify it, and interpret it. A group like ISIS exists only insofar as it can continue to circulate the memes, the units of cultural currency, that define it. Ironically, the statements that convey “we will end/we will bring the end” must circulate more frequently and intensely than statements of groups that merely want to persist over time. That is, ISIS redoubles its work precisely because its mission is to bring about the apocalypse itself. It must maintain membership, articulate doctrine, police boundaries, interpret signs, and reinforce devotion—all the practices by which it is brought forth—so that it may reach the very moment of undoing it has promised. To end themselves, ISIS must first intensify the very operations that make it a group.

No group demonstrates the necessity of endless group-making better than a group that declares it wants to end. If ISIS truly ceased the work of assembly, if they had ceased recruitment, ceased the process of ritual purification, ceased the liturgical and interpretive labor of differentiating themselves from other groups, they would not arrive at the apocalypse; ‘ISIS’ would just end. They are engaged in a strict process of purification, one whose ultimate conclusion is merely dispersal. What ‘death-cults’ show is not a weakness in a-sociologists method but a strength. ISIS shows that even negation is an act of assembly, even annihilation requires articulation, and even disappearance must be constructed. For ISIS to end themselves, they must first be more themselves than ever, an impossible task. 

## Bibliography: 

Latour, Bruno. Reassembling the Social: An Introduction to Actor-Network-Theory. Oxford University Press, 2005, https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780199256044.001.0001.

Wood, Graeme. “What ISIS Really Wants.” The Atlantic, 16 Feb. 2015. Global. The Atlantic, https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2015/03/what-isis-really-wants/384980/.

“Islamic State.” Wikipedia, 12 Nov. 2025. Wikipedia, https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Islamic_State&oldid=1321731728.
